Tunneling in Gopherspace
October 14th, 2025

*Notice for Gopher readers*
This is an entry from my website about the Gopher protocol. If you are already
here on Gopher, it might be redundant as it is intended to be read by people
who don't know what Gopher is. Nonetheless, feel free to read it anyway if you
like.

Do you like retro computing and the old internet? Well if you are here and
anything like me, you probably do. This is an introduction to Gopherspace.

Why I am writing this: There is a wealth of information about what Gopher is
and why it's great... in gopherspace. On the contrary the surface web can be a
little bit hit or miss when it comes to finding information about it. A search
for gopher will more likely than not return pictures of furry rodents; add the
word 'protocol' to the query and there certainly exist a few great
introductions, but this one is intended for Neocities users (and the like) who
may not have heard of this awesome piece of computing history yet.

Gopher is an internet communication protocol which was released in 1991. You
are probably familiar with HTTP, another protocol which is used for websites.
The "World Wide Web," although having become synonymous with the term
"internet," is not the only communication method in it's likeness to exist.
Gopher was the precursor to the web, having been invented just a few years
before it. A gopher page (often called a gopherhole) is like a website, but
with no images, sound, video, or javascript. "Gopherholes" are essentially
completely text based, and are traversed in a menu like format. Image and video
files can be uploaded to gopherholes too, but they can't be viewed directly
without downloading them first. This structure is ideal for terminal based
browsing. Info Source: Wikipedia (Gopher Protocol)

Obviously, the more featureful World Wide Web quickly overtook Gopher after
it's release in 1993, nonethless, Gopherspace still remains active today by a
sizable community of enthusiasts. Now you might be asking yourself, why in the
hell would I ever use this if I can just use the web? Well, as you may already
know all too well, the web's strengths are also it's downfall. In the modern
age, the majority of websites are chalk full of unecessary javascript, ads,
tracking, clutter, and oftentimes, not by the web's own fault, home to
unhealthy content. In the wake of generative AI and with billions of users
online, browsing the web can feel like sifting through a whole lot of nothing.
Gopher on the other hand, being completely text based and somewhat obscure, has
a much greater focus on interesting text content that can't be compensated for
by other mediums. It's not going to replace the World Wide Web for clear
reasons, but it can be nice to get away from the noise for a change; and
chances are you will learn a thing or two in your time there.

Accessing gopherspace is pretty easy. It used to be even easier because web
browsers like Firefox supported gopher natively, meaning you could just
navigate to a URL and view a page. However, in the case of Firefox this feature
was removed in 2011. The easiest way to browse gopher is to use the Floodgap
Public Gopher Proxy. This will serve gopher pages through http so they can be
viewed just like websites. However, in my opinion this takes some of the fun
out of it. The best way to access gopherspace is to use a terminal based
browser like Lynx (released in 1992 but still maintained today) to get the true
experience. There also exist other terminal based browsers, like Bombadillo,
which are capable of browsing other newer text based internet protocols as
well, such as Gemini and Finger.  In fact, if you are viewing this page with
Lynx or the like right now, you can just follow one of the URLs below to start.

Here are a few major gopher networks to start you off:

Floodgap:
gopher://gopher.floodgap.com/ 

Public Access UNIX System: 
gopher://sdf.org/ SDF

Bitreich:
gopher://bitreich.org/ 

Quux:
gopher://gopher.quux.org/

My personal gopherhole
gopher://thuleanotherworld.com

If you are interested, you can easily get your own gopherhole by creating an
account on the SDF pubnix, or one of various other pubnix servers. My personal
gopherhole runs on the gophernicus server daemon.

Thank you for reading and hopefully you think Gopher is as cool as I do.
